---
layout: post
title: "Week 5: Typography on the Web"
date: 2023-02-24 00:00
# categories: announcements
tags: schedule
---

## Schedule
- Responsive Web Design
- CSS Box Model, Grid and Flexbox
- Go over Assignment 2 and Introduce Assignment 3

## Homework
- Assignment 3: Responsive Web Layout
- Read more about CSS Grid on [A Complete Guide to CSS Grid by CSS Tricks](https://css-tricks.com/snippets/css/complete-guide-grid/)

## Responsive Web Design

### ViewPort

Last time we introduced units for viewport. On desktop operating systems, browser viewports are normally a fixed number of pixels wide.

In responsive website design, the viewport is the area of the browser window where the web page is displayed. The size of the viewport is determined by the device's screen size, resolution and orientation (portrait or landscape). When designing for a responsive website, it is important to consider the different sizes and dimensions of the viewport that a user may have, and ensure that the layout of the website adjusts accordingly, to provide a consistent and optimal user experience on any device. 

```html
<head>
  <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0">
</head>
```
This is an example to set the viewport of a webpage.
- `name` attribute has to be set to "viewport" and `content` attribute contains a series of key-value pairs that control the behavior of the viewport.
- `width=device-width` sets the width of the viewport to be equal to the width of the device's screen.
- `initial-scale=1.0` sets initial zoom-level of the viewport when the page is first loaded. Value `1.0` means that the page is displayed at 100% of its size.

Together these values ensures that the content of the web page is optimized for the device's screen size and is displayed at an appropriate scale when it's first loaded.

### RECAP: Viewport Units 
Viewport units in CSS are units of measurement that are based on the size of the viewport, or the visible area of a web page. They allow developers to create responsive designs that adjust to the size of the screen or window being used to view the page. There are 4 types of viewport units:
- vw (viewport width) - 1vw is equal to 1% of the viewport width.
- vh (viewport height) - 1vh is equal to 1% of the viewport height.
- vmin (viewport minimum) based on the smaller dimension of the viewport. If the viewport height is smaller than the width, the value of 1vmin will be equal to 1% of the viewport height.
- vmax (viewport maximum) - If the viewport height is larger than the width, the value of 1vmax will be equal to 1% of viewport height.


### Media Queries
Media queries are a feature in CSS that allows web developers to apply different styles to a web page based on the characteristics of the device or browser that is being used to view the page.

(Media queries can be used to create responsive web designs that adapt to different screen sizes and device characteristics. Making sure that the webpages are displayed optimally on a wide range of devices from desktop computers to smartphones and tablets.)

- You can define one or more media queries in the CSS file, specifying certain conditions under which a defined styles should be applied.

- A media query consists of a media type, such as "screen" or "print" and one or more conditions such as media features used to match the characteristics of the device.

- Examples of media features include screen size, resolution, orientation, and color depth.

- Complete list of all [media types](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@media#media_types)

Example:
```css
@media print, screen and (min-width: 800px) {
  body {
    font-size: 18px;
  }
}
```
This media query applies to devices that match two conditions: media type of either “screen” or “print” and the screen width is at least 800px. Under such conditions, the font size of the body element will be set to 18 pixels.

1. Screen size: use `min-width` and `max-width` to apply styles based on the width of the device's screen.

```css
@media screen and (max-width: 800px) {
  /* Styles for screens smaller than 800px wide */
}

@media screen and (min-width: 800px) and (max-width: 1024px) {
  /* Styles for screens between 800px and 1024px wide */
}

@media screen and (min-width: 1024px) {
  /* Styles for screens larger than 1024px wide */
}
```

2. Resolution: use `min-resolution` and `max-resolution` to apply styles based on the resolution of the device's screen.

```css
@media screen and (max-resolution: 150dpi) {
  /* Styles for screens with resolution up to 150dpi */
}

@media screen and (min-resolution: 150dpi) and (max-resolution: 300dpi) {
  /* Styles for screens with resolution between 150dpi and 300dpi */
}

@media screen and (min-resolution: 300dpi) {
  /* Styles for screens with resolution higher than 300dpi */
}
```

3. Orientation: use `orientation` to apply styles based on the orientation of the device's screen.

```css
@media screen and (orientation: portrait) {
  /* Styles for screens in portrait mode */
}

@media screen and (orientation: landscape) {
  /* Styles for screens in landscape mode */
}
```

4. Color Depth: use `min-color` and `max-color` media features to apply styles based on color depth of the device's screen.

```css
@media screen and (min-color: 16) and (max-color: 256) {
  /* Styles for screens with color depth between 2^4 and 2^8 */
}
```

Color depth refers to the number of bits used to represent the color of each pixel on the screen, aka "bit depth". Color depth is measured in bits per pixel (bbp) typically expressed as a power of 2. A color depth of 8bbp can display up to 256 colors (2^8). 

It helps ensure that the webpages are optimized for the color capabilities of different devices.

## CSS Box Model

Essentially browser renders every HTML element as a rectangular box based on the standard CSS Box model, and each HTML element on your webpage consists of content, padding, border and margin.

- The box model is used to control the size and position of elements on the web page.

- The content refers to the actual content of the element, while padding, border and margins are areas surrounding the content.

## CSS Grid

### Intro to CSS Grid
- It's a 2-dimensional grid-based layout system that allow you to define rows and columns and place elements into those rows and columns. 

- Here is an example where a CSS grid is defined using the `grid` value of the display.

```html
<div class="container">
  <div class="item1"></div>
  <div class="item2"></div>
  <div class="item3"></div>
  <div class="item4"></div>
  <div class="item5"></div>
  <div class="item6"></div>
  <div class="item7"></div>
  <div class="item8"></div>
  <div class="item9"></div>
</div>
```

```css
.container {
  display: grid;
  grid-template-columns: 1fr 1fr 1fr;
  grid-template-rows: 100px 100px 100px;
  gap: 10px;
}
```

- `grid-template-rows` defines the line names and track sizing functions of grid rows.

- `grid-template-columns` defines the line names and track sizing functions of grid columns.

- `fr` is short for fraction, which represents a fraction of the available space in the grid container.

- `gap` or `grid-gap` sets the gap between rows and columns. It takes either one of two `<length>`, `<percentage>` or `cal()` function as values.

### Grid Terminology

1. Grid Container: the element on which the grid is defined. It can be either div or section.

2. Grid Item: the children of the grid container, placing onto the grid and positioned according to the grid lines.

3. Grid Cell: the intersection of a row and a column; also the smallest unit on the grid. 

  <mark>Grid item and grid cell are related but not the same.</mark>

  A grid item is any element that is a direct child of a grid container and is placed onto the grid. It can span one or multiple cells, and it's positioned according to grid lines.
  A grid cell is defined by a rows and a column, the rectangle space between two adjacent horizontal and vertical grid lines. 

4. Grid Line: the lines that defines the rows and columns of the grid.

5. Grid Track: the space between two adjacent grid lines. Can be a row or a column.

6. Grid Area: the space surrounded by four grid lines. It can be defined using the `grid-template-area` property.

7. Grid Template: defines the rows and columns of the grid using `grid-template-rows` and `grid-template-columns`.

8. Grid Gap: the space between grid tracks using `grid-row-gap` and `grid-column-gap`

9. Grid Line Names: names given to grid lines. Can be used to reference grid lines and define areas using the `grid-template-areas` property.

### Another Example

```html
<div class="container">
  <div class="item-a"></div>
  <div class="item-b"></div>
  <div class="item-c"></div>
  <div class="item-d"></div>
</div>
```

```css
.container {
  display: grid;
  grid-template-columns: 1fr 1fr 1fr 1fr;
  grid-template-rows: 10vh 80vh 10vh;
  grid-template-areas: 
    "header header header header"
    "sidebar . main main "
    "footer footer footer footer";
}

.item-a {
  grid-area: header;
}

.item-b {
  grid-area: sidebar;

}

.item-c {
  grid-area: main;
}

.item-d {
  grid-area: footer;
}
```


## CSS Flexbox

### Intro to Flexbox
- Flexbox is a powerful layout technique that allows you to create flexible and responsive layout.

- It's a one-dimensional layout method that deals with either rows or columns, providing an efficient way to distribute space among items in a container.


### Flexbox Terminology

1. Flex Container: Use `display: flex;` to establish the container as a flexbox.

2. Flex Item: the child elements of a flex container.

3. Main Axis: the primary axis of a flex container, which can be either horizontal or vertical.

4. Cross Axis: the perpendicular axis to the main axis.

5. Flex Direction: Flexbox uses `flex-direction` to set both main axis and cross axis - which can be either horizontal or vertical.

Here are some values `flex-direction` takes:
- row (default): left to right
- row-reverse: righ to left
- column: top to bottom
- column-reverse: bottom to top

6. Justify Content: the property that aligns flex itmes along the main axis of a flex container. 

- `flex-start` (default): items are packed toward the start of the flex-direction

- `flex-end`: items are packed towards the end of the flex-direction

- `center`: items are centered along the line

- `space-between`: items are evenly distributed in the line; first item is on the start line, last item on the end line.

- `space-around`: items are evenly distributed in the line with equal space around them.

- `space-evenly`: spacing between any two items and the space to the edges is equal.

7. Align Items: `align-items` aligns flex items along the corss axis of a flex container.

- `flex-start`: items are placed at the start of the cross-axis.

- `flex-end`: items are placed at the end of the cross axis.

- `center`: items are centered along the cross-axis.

- `stretch` (default): stretch to fill the container.

- `baseline`: items are aligned such as their baselines align.

8. Align Content: align-content aligns a flex container when there is extra space in the cross-axis, similar to how justify-content aligns individual items within the main-axis.

- `normal` (default): items are packed in their default position as if no value was set.

- `flex-start`: items are packed to the start of the container.

- `flex-end`: items are packed to the end of the container.

- `center`: items are centered in the container

- `space-between`: items are evenly distributed

- `space-around`: items are evenly distributed with equal space around each line.

- `space-evenly`: items are evenly distributed with equal space around them.


9. Flex wrap: it determines whether flex items should wrap to a new line when the container is not wide enough to accommodate them all.

- `nowrap` (default): all flex items will be on one line.

- `wrap`: flex items will wrap onto multiple lines, from top to bottom

- `wrap-reverse`: flex items will wrap onto multiple lines from bottom to top.

- [Visual demos of flex-wrap](https://css-tricks.com/almanac/properties/f/flex-wrap/)

### Demo

- Getting started with an example:
```html
<div class="container">
  <header><h1>Core 2: Interaction</h1></header>

  <div class="content">
    <div class="sidebar">
      <ul>
        <li><a href="">About</a></li>
        <li><a href="">Lab</a></li>
        <li><a href="">Studio</a></li>
      </ul>
    </div>

    <div class="main">
      <h2>Welcome</h2>
      <p>This is a demo website where you can find the codes we wrote in class.</p>
    </div>
  </div>

  <footer>&copy; Lilan Yang 2023</footer>

</div>
```

```css
.container {
  display:flex;
  flex-direction: column;
  height: 100vh
}

.content {
  display: flex;
  flex-direction: row;
  flex:1;
}

.sidebar {
  width: 20%
}

.main {
  flex: 1;
}

footer {
  text-align;
}

```

## Differences between CSS Box Model, Grid and Flexbox

- CSS Box Model consists of 4 elements - content, padding, border and margin - which form a rectangular box around an HTML element

- CSS Box Model is used to control the size and position of elements on the webpage.

- CSS Grid is based on a two-dimensional grid system. 

- CSS Grid allows you to define rows and columns and place element into those rows and columns

- CSS Flex Box is a one-dimensional layout system that is used to organzie elements along a single row or column.

| Box Model | Grid | Flexbox |
| --- | --- | --- |
| CSS Box Model consists of 4 elements - content, padding, border and margin - which form a rectangular box around an HTML element | CSS Grid is based on a two-dimensional grid system | CSS Flexbox is a one-dimensional layout system |
| CSS Box Model is used to control the size and position of elements on the webpage | CSS Grid allows you to define rows and columns and place element into those rows and columns | CSS Flexbox is used to organzie elements along a single row or column.


## Advanced Frameworks

Here are some commonly used CSS frameworks for responsiveness:
- [Bootstrap](https://getbootstrap.com/)
- [Foundation](https://get.foundation/)
- [Materialize](https://materializecss.com/)

## Assignment 2: Recreate Poster

```css
.content-flex {
            display: flex;
            flex-direction: column;
            justify-content: space-between;
            height: 95%;    

        }
        .content-flex p{
            font-size: 7vh;
        }
        .footer-flex{
            display: flex;
            justify-content: space-between;
            height: 5%;
        }
        .footer-flex p{
            font-size: 5vh;
            margin:0;
        }
        .mid {
            position: relative;
            text-align: center;
            z-index: 1;
        }
        .green {
            display: block;
            position: fixed;
            height: 135px;
            width: 210px;
            background-color: green;
            transform: translate(-50%, -50%);
            left: calc((100%-210px)/2);
            top: calc((100%-135px)/2);
            z-index: 2;
        }
        .green:hover {
            z-index: -1;
        }
```

## Assignment 3: Responsive Web Layout

DUE: Mar 10, 9AM

Choose one webpage that you would like to recreate, and Develop the HTML and CSS code for using responsive design techniques. Make sure your website is optimized for different screen sizes such as desktop and mobile.

This assignment focuses on the layout; the content doesn't have to be the same - you are allowed to give personal touches to this assignment.

Publish your codes to your GitHub and submit a link to your website.

Grading criteria:
- Website has navigation bar
- Website closely resembles the original website in terms of color, fonts 
- Website is responsive and optimized for different screen sizes
- Use CSS techniques such as grid and flexbox
- Clean codes that is easy to read with comments


Here are some examples of website you can choose from:
- [Spotify](https://open.spotify.com/)
- [Dropbox](https://www.dropbox.com/)
- [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Main_Page)
- [The New York Times](https://www.nytimes.com/)
- [Airbnb](https://www.airbnb.com/)
- [Apple](https://www.apple.com/)
- [Netflix](https://www.netflix.com/)
