---
layout: post
title: "Week 7: Intro to DOM"
date: 2023-03-10 00:00
# categories: announcements
tags: schedule
---

## Schedule
- Intro to JavaScript
- Intro to DOM
- random()


## Homework
- Continue to work on Project 2, DUE 3/28
- Additional [JSON Example](https://github.com/core-interaction-s23/collection) from Michael


## Intro to JavaScript

So far in this class, we have covered using HTML to structure the content of the webpages and CSS to stylize these content. For the next part of this class, we will use JavaScript to make static webpages dynamic.

What is JavaScript?
- JavaScript (JS) is one of the core tech for World Wed Web, often used with HTML and CSS to add interactive features to webpages, such as validating forms, creating animations, and updating content without reloading the page.

- It is a high-level programming language that can used for both client-side and server-side. Client-side handles the manipulation of webpages, while server-side enables back-end access to databases, file systems and servers.

- It was created in 1995 by Brendan Eich and Java and JavaScript are two distinct programming languages.

### Basic Syntax in JavaScript
Variables in JavaScript are used to store data values. To declare a variable in JavaScript, you use the `let`, `var`, or `const` keyword, followed by the variable name. For example:

```js
let myString = "Hello, World!";   // a string
var myNumber = 13;                // a number
const myConstant = false;         // a number
```

Comments are used to add notes or explanations to your code. 
```js
// is used for single-line comment
/* 
This is used for multiple-line comment
*/
```

Functions in JavaScript is a block of code that can be used repeatedly whenever that particular function was called. They can take in parameters (inputs) and return values (outputs). To declare a function in JavaScript, you use the `function` keyword, followed by the function name and any parameters in parentheses. For example:

```js
function myFunction(param1, param2) {
  // code to be executed
  return result;
}
```

`console.log()`

`console.log` is a method that allows you to print messages or values to the console, which is a tool available in most web browsers that lets developers see what's happening behind the scenes of their code.

```js
console.log("Hello, world!");
```

- It can help you debug your code by providing insight into what's happening at different points in your program.

- It can be used to test code quickly and easily. Instead of creating a bunch of HTML and CSS to test a new JavaScript feature, you can simply write a quick script that uses console.log to print the results to the console.

- It can be used to provide feedback to users. For example, you might use console.log to let users know when an error occurs or when a task has been completed.


### Data Types
In JavaScript, there are several data types that are used to represent different types of information. The most common data types are numbers, strings, and booleans.

- Numbers in JavaScript are used to represent numeric values. They can be integers, decimals or even negative numbers. For example, 5, 5.5 and -7 are all examples of numbers in JavaScript.

- Strings are used to represent textual data in JavaScript. They are a sequence of characters enclosed in single or double quotes. For example, "Hello, world!" and 'JavaScript' are both examples of strings.

- Boolean: Booleans are used to represent true or false values. They are commonly used in conditional statements and loops to determine whether a block of code should be executed or not. For example, true and false are both examples of booleans.

- Operators are symbols or keywords that are used to perform mathematical and logical operations on data in JavaScript. There are several types of operators in JavaScript:

  1. Arithmetic operator: These operators are used to perform basic mathematical operations such as addition (+), subtraction (-), multiplication (*), division (/), and modulus (%).

  2. Comparison operators: These operators are used to compare two values and return a boolean value. Some examples include equal to (==), not equal to (!=), greater than (>), less than (<), greater than or equal to (>=), and less than or equal to (<=).

  3. Logical operators: These operators are used to combine multiple boolean expressions and return a single boolean value. The most common logical operators are AND (&&), OR (||), and NOT (!).

  4. Assignment operators: These operators are used to assign a value to a variable. Some examples include the equal sign (=), addition assignment (+=), subtraction assignment (-=), multiplication assignment (*=), and division assignment (/=).

  5. Conditional operators: The ternary operator (?) is a conditional operator in JavaScript, it's a shorthand way to write an if/else statement in one line of code.



```js
let x = 5;
let y = 2;

/* Arithmetic operator */
console.log(x + y); // Output: 7
console.log(x - y); // Output: 3
console.log(x * y); // Output: 10
console.log(x / y); // Output: 2.5
console.log(x % y); // Output: 1

/* Comparison operators */
console.log(x == y);
console.log(x != y);
console.log(x > y);
console.log(x < y);
console.log(x >= y);
console.log(x <= y);

/* Logical operators */
console.log(x > 3 && y < 5); // Output: true
console.log(x < 3 || y > 5); // Output: false
console.log(!(x > y)); // Output: false

/* Assignment operators*/

x += 2;
console.log(x); // Output: 7

x -= 2;
console.log(x); // Output: 5

x *= 2;
console.log(x); // Output: 10

x /= 2;
console.log(x); // Output: 5

x %= 2;
console.log(x); // Output: 1

/* Conditional operators */
let isXFive = x == 5 ? "Yes" : "No";

console.log(isXFive); 

```

### Control Structures
Control structure actually controls the flow of execution of a program. Here are the several control structure supported by JavaScript.

- if... else

  `if` statements are used to execute code if a certain condition is true, and you can also use `else` statements to execute code when the condition is not true.

  Syntax:
  ``` js
  if (expression) {
    Statement(s) to be executed if expression is true
  }
  ```
  Example:
  ```js
  let score = 85;

  if (score >= 90) {
    console.log("You got an A!");
  } else if (score >= 80) {
    console.log("You got a B!");
  } else {
    console.log("You need to study more.");
  }
  ```
  
- for

  `for` loops are used to execute code a specific number of times. 
  Syntax:
  ``` js
  for (initialization; test condition; iteration statement){
    Statement(s) to be executed if test condition is true
  }
  ```
  Example:
  ```js
  for (let i = 0; i < 5; i++) {
    console.log(i);
  }
  ```

- switch

  `switch` allows you to execute different blocks of code depending on the value of an expression. It's a more efficient way to write multiple if...else statements that compare the same value.

  Syntax:
  ```js
  switch (expression) {
    case condition 1: statement(s)
      break;
   case condition 2: statement(s)
      break;
   ...
   case condition n: statement(s)
      break;
   default: statement(s)
  }
  ```

  Example:
  ``` js
  let day = "Friday";

  switch (day) {
  case "Friday":
    console.log("It's Friday!");
    break;
  default:
    console.log("It's some other day.");
    break;
  }
  ```

  - The `switch` keyword starts the switch statement.
  - `expression` is a value that is checked against each case.
  - `case` statements specify values to compare against `expression`.
  - `break` statements are used to exit the `switch` statement and prevent the execution of subsequent cases. If you omit the `break` statement, the code will "fall through" and continue to execute the next case. This can be useful in some situations, but it can also cause bugs if you forget to include a `break` statement.
  - The `default` case is executed if none of the other cases match. This is optional.

- while

  `while` loops are used to execute code as long as a certain condition is true. 

  Syntax:
  ```js
  while (expression) {
    Statement(s) to be executed if expression is true
  }
  ```

  Example:
  ```
  let i = 0;

  while (i < 5) {
    console.log(i);
    i++;
  }
  ```

- do... while

  The key difference between a do...while loop and a while loop is that the do...while loop will always execute at least once, regardless of whether the condition is true or false.

  Syntax:
  ``` js
  do {
    Statement(s) to be executed;
  } while (expression);
  ```

  Example:
  ```js
  let i = 0;

  do {
    console.log(i);
    i++;
  } while (i < 5);
  ```

## Intro to DOM

- DOM stands for Document Object Model, which is a programming interface for web documents that allows for dynamic manipulation and modification of HTML and XML documents.

- The DOM represents the document as a tree-like structure of nodes and elements, with each node representing a part of the document.

```html
<html>
  <head>
    <title>My Website</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <h1>Welcome</h1>
    <p>This is my website.</p>
  </body>
</html>
```

In DOM Tree:
```
- Document (root)
  - html
    - head
      - title
        - "My Website"
    - body
      - h1
        - "Welcome"
      - p
        - "This is my website."
```

### Access Elements in DOM

- `document.getElementById()` selects an element by its ID attribute

- `document.getClassName()` selects an element by its class attribute

- `document.querySelector()` selects an elements by the first matching element using a CSS selector

- `document.querySelectorAll()` selects all matching elements using a CSS selector

### Modify Elements in DOM

- `innerHTML` to get or set the HTML content of an element

- `innerText` or `textContent` to get or set the text content of an element.

- `setAttribute()` to set an attribute on an element

- `style` to set an attribute on an element

### Create and Remove Element in DOM

- `document.createElement()` creates a new element

- `parentElement.appendChild()` adds a new element to the end of a parent element

- `parentElement.insertBefore()` adds a new element before an existing child element.

- `parentElement.removeChild()` removes an existing child element.

### Responding to Events in DOM

- `addEventListener()` to attach an event listener to an element

- `event` - 

- `preventDefault()`

- `stopPropagation()`



## Event Handling
