---
layout: post
title: "Week 12: Intro to P5.js III"
date: 2023-04-14 00:00
# categories: announcements
tags: schedule
---

## Schedule
More on p5.js
- array, push, pop
- objects, constructors
- coordinates and loadJSON

## Recap
What we have covered in p5.js so far
- Text and typography
- Basic drawing functions
    - createCanvas()
    - background()
    - ellipse()
    - rect()
- Basic color functions
    - fill()
    - stroke()
    - colorMode()
- Basic animation functions
- Basic event handling
    - mousePressed()
    - keyPressed()
    - mouseX()
    - mouseY()
- Conditional Statement
    - if
    - else
    - for

## Array

[Array Tutorials](https://editor.p5js.org/Belphe13/sketches/yLV5xJS1_)

1. Declare an array
    ```js
    let myArray = [5, 20, 10, 40, 25];
    ```
2. Access elements in array
    ```js
    myArray[0];
    ```

3. Add elements in array
    ```js
    myArray.push(80)
    ```
4. Remove elements in array
    ```js
    myArray.pop()
    ```
5. Loop through an array
    ```js
    for (let i = 0; i < myArray.length; i++) {
    console.log(myArray[i]); // prints each element in turn
    }
    ```

[Draw Circles with Array](https://editor.p5js.org/Belphe13/sketches/5E6kyEyPI)

## Object
Object-oriented programming OOP is a programming paradigm based on the concept of "objects", which can contain data and code. The data is in the form of fields, and the code is in the form of procedures. A common feature of objects is that procedures are attached to them and can access and modify the object's data fields. [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Object-oriented_programming)

Advantages of Object-oriented programming: 
- encapsulation (the ability to hide implementation details)
- abstraction (the ability to simplify complex systems)
- polymorphism (the ability to use the same interface for different types of objects).






### Class and Constructor
In p5.js, class is a template for the creation of objects. It's like a blueprint used to create many objects that share the same properties.

Constructor function is a special function that is called when an object is created. It is used to set initial values for the object's properties.

```js
class Circle {
  constructor(x, y, r) {
    this.x = x;
    this.y = y;
    this.r = r;
  }
  
  display() {
    ellipse(this.x, this.y, this.r);
  }
}
```

In this example, the Circle class has three properties: `x`, `y`, and `r`, which represent the circle's center x and y coordinates and its radius, respectively. The class also has a display() method, which is used to draw the circle using the p5.js ellipse() function.

To create a new circle object with constructor: 
```js
let myCircle = new Circle(100, 100, 50);
```
This creates a new Circle object with center coordinates (100, 100) and radius 50.

[Draw Circles When Clicking](https://editor.p5js.org/Belphe13/sketches/wiCrAf-sk)

## loadJSON()

[Coordinates Unfinished](https://editor.p5js.org/Belphe13/sketches/3IsUI468N)

### How to Convert Address to Coordinates
** Make sure to do this with personal gmail account.

1. Included addresses in one column
2. Go to "Extensions > Add-On > Get Add-Ons"
3. Search for "Geocode by Awesome Table" and install it.
4. Go to "Extensions" and click on the add-on you just installed
5. Click on "Start Geocoding" and a window will pop up on the right. You need to specify which sheet and column for addresses.
6. Click on "Geocode" button and wait for results!

## Homework
- Assignment 4: Project 3 Checkpoint